What you'll learn in this session is
what the Accelerate framework is about.
Some of you already are using it,
but for people who are not using it,
this would be a good introduction.
How to use the Accelerate framework?
That would be Eric's section.
And how to translate Altivec to SSC?
We have a small section
for hardware overview.
We have the instruction overview of the
SSC and the translation techniques of
how to translate your Altivec to SSC.
First of all,
I think the best thing to do for
performance on Mac OS X on any platform
for people who are hungry for that sort
of thing for computational performance
is to use the Accelerate framework.
And what is inside the
Accelerate framework?
We have a state-of-the-art
image processing library.
We have vector mathematics,
which is vForce and vMathlib.
We also have a state-of-the-art
signal processing library.
Some of you might be
using our FFTs already.
And our in-house technologies
use also the FFT quite a bit.
Then we also have the
entire LA-PACK and the BLAS,
which is the basic linear
algebra subroutines.
We also have large number computations.
I'd like to go over some of these
briefly to tell you what these are about.
The level 1, 2, 3 BLAS,
the basic linear algebra subroutines,
are vector-vector,
vector-vector matrix and
matrix-matrix computations.
And if you're doing that sort of work,
this is industry standard,
it can be found on all sorts of
platforms and all sorts of OSs.
The APIs are exactly the same.
LAPACK, the linear algebra
package for eigensolvers,
system solvers and things like that.
If you're doing linear algebra
work of any sort in speech
or in signal processing,
this would be the sort of
library that you like to use.
Now a little bit in detail about
what these libraries are all about.
vDSP, the signal processing
library that we have,
it has Fourier transforms, 1D and 2D,
real and complex,
single and double precision.
It has fast array math,
convolutions and correlations,
all the regular things that you can
find in a signal processing library.
vMathlib and vForce,
we set out to produce exactly the same
thing that we have on the scalar domain,
which is the LibM, on the vector domain.
So if you are sitting in vector code,
be it SSC or Altivec,
and you are dealing with 128-bit vectors,
hardware vectors here,
not mathematical vectors
that you point to,
pointers, then you would like to have
the same facilities that
you have inside your scalar,
like if you like to take the cosine of
that vector or sine or things like that.
vMathlib is... vForce is
that sort of facility.
It will give you,
it will allow you to stay
on the vector domain,
it will give you the answers
back in the vector domain.
So this is for people who are
actually vectorizing their code,
writing vector code.
A lot of people who would like to
benefit from vector computation in
single precision on Altivec and single
precision and double precision on SSC,
would like to have this sort of facility,
but they like to stay away
from vector arithmetic.
vForce is for them.
It turns out vForce has higher
performance than the other libraries.
vForce has higher
performance than vMathlib,
and the reason is that vForce
operates on very large arrays.
You can give it an array of
1024 elements or 1024k elements,
lots of elements, and this allows the
pipes to be saturated,
so it will give you
much better performance.
Using vForce does not make you
use the vector engine directly,
but underneath it decides to do it,
and it will do that for you.
So you don't have to be any
vector programming to use vForce.
Very, very capable of doing that.
Very, very capable little library.
We introduced that.
This is the first
incarnation of it for Tiger.
As we go along,
before I go through this here,
is that our aim is that vMathlib
and vForce will mimic more and
more the functionality of the Libem
that we have on the scalar domain.
So many of the functions which
you may find not there will
eventually show up there,
so that we'll have parity
pretty much between Libem,
vForce, and vMathlib.
So that's what we're planning on doing.
The other two libraries
are vBasicOps and vBignum.
As you know,
the hardware on SSC and Altevec allow
you a certain amount of facilities
to a certain amount of data types.
On Altevec,
you have things up to 32 bits,
but if you wanted to
have higher than that,
if you wanted to operate
on 64 bits or 128 bits,
let's say adds, multiplies, or shifts,
or things like that,
then the vBasicOps will do that for you.
vBignum is essentially the same thing,
but it takes it from 128 bit
to 1024 and allows you to do
multi-precision arithmetic on that.
The last thing in here is vImage.
vImage is our, as I said,
state-of-the-art image
processing library.
It is used in all sorts of
technologies within Apple and outside.
It's very fast.
We introduced this two OSs ago.
It has the regular things,
the convolutions, the morphologies,
geometry, transforms,
and things of that nature.
What I would like to do is I just
gave you a small overview of
what the Accelerate framework is.
I'd like to pass this on to my colleague,
Eric Pospischel,
who is going to talk to you in depth
about how to use the Accelerate framework
by one example and go over one example.
Eric.
Thank you.
Good morning.
Well, I just told you some of
what's in Accelerate.
I'm going to tell you
why to use it and how.
This slide shows the performance of
one of our FFT routines on a G5 system.
FFT stands for Fast Fourier Transform.
We don't need to go into much
detail about what it does,
although coincidentally somebody
just asked me before the talk
about starting to use this.
It is a quite popular
routine in signal processing.
It's a famous routine and it provides
a good mix of both calculation in the
processor and motion of data in memory.
So it's a challenging
routine to optimize.
The first table shows how long it
takes to execute a single-position
FFT on 1,024 complex elements on a G5.
If you open up Numerical
Recipes and type in the 4-1
FFT routine there and run that,
it's going to take about
130,000 CPU cycles to finish.
If you're familiar with the FFT,
you might have heard of FFTW,
which stands for Fastest
Fourier Transform in the West.
And it's a highly optimized and
self-tuning FFT developed at MIT by
Matteo Frigo and Steven Johnson.
And it certainly runs faster
than Numerical Recipes in
about 32,300 CPU cycles.
But it doesn't take full advantage
of Altavec's capabilities.
FFT does take advantage of vector
processing to great effect.
And as you can see,
it runs a little faster than
the fastest FFT in the West.
It runs about three times
faster in 11,200 CPU cycles.
So we got an advantage here out
of using the Altivec capabilities.
Double precision is harder because
the PowerPC doesn't provide vector
processing for double precision.
And in spite of that,
we still managed to beat FFTW quite
handily from 40,000 CPU cycles
for FFTW to 27,000 for ours.
So that's a clear win.
That should motivate you pretty strongly
to want to use the Accelerate framework.
And next, here is how to use it.
I'm going to go through this quickly,
and then I'm going to look at
a little bit of example code.
So, in the source code,
you need to include the Xcelerate header.
Simple enough.
And when you build the application,
you need to tell the linker that
you're using the Xcelerate framework.
And if you're using Xcode,
as probably most of you are,
certainly after Monday,
I think a lot of you are,
you do that just by adding the
Xcelerate framework to your project.
And once you do that,
Xcode knows how to pass the
framework to the linker.
If you're using make or
link commands directly,
you just add the GCC switch,
dash framework Xcelerate
to the link command.
So those are the declarations you need.
And here's some sample code.
One reason we chose the FFT is
it's a little more complicated to
use than most xcelerate routines.
A lot of routines,
you can just call and do the work.
The FFT as an alternative
requires some setup.
In spite of that,
it's still fairly straightforward to use.
So this summarizes the code to do that.
To do the setup, you call this routine,
vdsp create FFT setup at the--you call
it once at the start of your application,
and it gets the memory it needs,
and it does some calculations to
prepare some constants for later FFTs,
and it returns a value to you
that is a handle to that data.
You do need to check that handle to
see if allocation of memory failed.
If it didn't fail,
then you can use the FFTs as many times
as you want later in your application
without having to check the data
anymore-- check the setup anymore.
So once you've got the setup,
you can go ahead and call vdsp fft zip.
And you can call this as
many times as you want.
This is a high-performance routine.
The setup is not.
You call the setup only once.
You call the FFT as many times as you
want while you're doing your image
processing or system processing,
whatever.
And at the end of your application,
you release the memory.
You call vDSP destroy
FFT setup to do that.
Could I have demo one on screen now?
We'll take a look at
the demonstration code.
This is actual running code.
It doesn't do too much
because all the data is zero.
You have to supply your own data.
We just give you the routine.
We'll take a look at some pieces of this.
Obviously the include
of the headers here.
Another thing to look at
here is we allocate the data,
we allocate, excuse me,
we allocate space for the data.
Malik is a common way to allocate large
amounts of space and it has additional
benefit of returning addresses that
are aligned well for high performance.
The AltaVec capability,
the AltaVec processor wants its vectors
to be aligned to multiples of 16
bytes and Malik will do that for you.
If instead you allocate space
by declaring arrays in C,
they might not be aligned
well and you won't get as good
performance and that will,
there will be some effect
of that as well on SSE.
It doesn't require alignment in the
same ways that AltaVec does but it
still benefits from it in situations.
So we do recommend using Malik
to allocate the space you need.
And then for complex data,
we package the,
We package the pointers to the
real imaginary parts into a
data structure here so they can
be passed around as one unit.
I just set the data to zero.
As I said, you have to supply your own.
We call the setup routine here and
check its result and call the FFT.
When we call the FFT,
that first parameter is that data
that got returned by the setup.
The second parameter is the structure
that contains the pointers to your data,
the signal data.
The third parameter here
isn't the length of the data.
It's going to be the base-2
logarithm of the length.
So that would be 10 to
represent 1,024 elements.
2 to the 10 is 1,024.
And,
the final parameter is the direction,
which is forward for forward FFT and
FFT_inverse for a reverse FFT.
And, there's no result here,
we don't have anything to test
because we know it's going to work.
This sample code does only
show one call to the FFT,
but typically this is going to be in some
sort of processing loop and release our
space and destroy everything at the end.
So, it's really pretty simple to use
a lot of the accelerate routines.
you can just insert them into your
application pretty quickly on that.
Now I'm going to give the
floor to my colleague,
Ian Ollmann,
who will show you many things that
you must do to optimize an application
for high performance if you choose
not to use our Accelerate framework
or can't use it for some way.
So the reason we presented the
Accelerate framework first is we
really want you to investigate that
first and save yourself a lot of time.
You can write your own AlteVac code,
and a number of you have,
and that's great.
There are a lot of functions
that we just can't provide in the
Accelerate framework because they're
very specialized to your app.
We'd like to build it as we go along and
bring in more and more functionality.
But if you've got something
really wild and crazy,
you might have to write your own code.
So this is always going to be something
people will be looking at doing.
And now that we have the Intel platform,
for the same reasons you vectorized,
you're probably going to
want to write SSE code.
It's a definite strong win over Scalar.
So we encourage you to
consider doing that.
So for the rest of this talk,
I'll be talking about SSE.
What I'm really talking about is SSE,
SSE2, SSE3, and any future incarnations.
It just gets to be taxing
to say that all the time.
So the good news about translating
AlteVac to SSE is that they're
actually quite similar.
They have the same vector size
as 128-bit wide for the register.
There's pretty good instruction homology.
You'll generally find that the
AlteVac series of instructions are
larger than SSE in terms of numbers.
So there'll be a few things that are
used in AlteVac that aren't there,
and you'll have to find ways around it.
In our experience,
and we've ported a bunch
of the Accelerate framework
over to the SSE unit,
most of the work that we actually
had to do when writing the Altivec
code was the parallelization,
the DAO layout,
planning and handling misalignment.
The good news is you've already done
that work if you have Altivec code,
and you don't really
have to redo it for SSC.
The data's already
there where you put it.
It's already aligned.
It may already be padded out
to multiples of 128 bits.
So in our experience,
and we hope that it carries over to you,
you can expect the translation
of Altivec to SSC to take a small
fraction of the time that it took to
write the Altivec in the first place,
in most cases.
So as a overview of what you learned,
we'll have a brief
discussion of hardware.
Now, Apple hasn't actually said what the
specific chip is that's going to go out,
so I'm just going to kind of gloss
over it and show you what's on
the developer transition system,
but don't expect that that's necessarily
going to apply to what customers get.
There's a C programming model.
You don't have to write an assembly.
As its on-site of data
types and intrinsics.
And finally, I'll talk about difference
in instructions,
like how to map from ultimate
to SSE and some of the tougher
cases and what to watch out for.
So as far as the hardware overview,
as I mentioned earlier,
there's eight 128-bit XMM registers.
If we, on the 64-bit architecture
looking way out into the future,
or if you're programming for Linux now,
you'll find that you
actually get 16 of them.
The register file is flat like Altivec.
It's not stack-based
like the FPU on the X87.
There's no special purpose registers,
so you can use all that space.
The instructions generally take no more
than two register operations-- operands.
So you might be used to
from Altivec being able to
provide up to four operators,
so you'll only get two here.
And the instructions are
typically destructive.
That is, one of the inputs is destroyed
and replaced with result data.
On the Pentium IV core,
I just want to give you a
sense that there's really a
lot going on behind the scenes.
You've got eight different units
providing the vector support.
So it's not very simple in the back end,
but on the dispatch,
everything goes through port ones.
You kind of get this throughput of
one vector instruction per cycle.
As far as the data types
that are supported,
they support the same
sorts of types as Altivec.
You can get 8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit ints,
32-bit floats as well.
In addition,
there is support for 64-bit types,
which means 64-bit ints and
double precision floating point.
The hardware provides aligned
and misaligned loads and stores,
so that will probably be
welcome to a number of you.
There is a limited permute
capability on board.
It's you can do predicated
operation just like Altivec.
It has some saturated arithmetic support.
It has this normal set of
integer operations that
you'd expect from Altivec,
sort of multiply, add, subtracts, min,
max.
It also provides a sum of
absolute differences instructions
useful for video encoding.
It does the various Boolean operations.
Same thing for floating point, multiply,
add, subtract, et cetera.
In addition,
there's hardware divide and square root,
so that will save you a little
time if you're tired of programming
Newton graphs and opt-in.
The C programming model for SSE,
there's an Intel C programming interface
supported by the Intel C compiler and
also various other Intel-based compilers.
And it's a lot like the Altivec
C programming interface.
So to give you an idea,
they provide a series of types.
The Intel types,
there's a double underbar M128I,
which will stand for any packed integer.
You can also use double
underbar 128 for floats.
And the other type of type is the D.
In Accelerate framework,
we provide a whole series of types to
better differentiate the various integer
types you might put in a register.
We actually suggest you use these
things because it gives GDB more
information on how to show the data.
So you can actually view your data
as a vector full of 8-bit types.
So if you include accelerate.h,
you'll be able to use the sort of VSNT8,
for example, as shown here.
And you can view your
stuff as a series of cares.
As for the intrinsics,
Altivec would have a vecadd,
SSC will have a mmaddepi8.
The convention here is they
put the type of the data on
the end of the instruction.
E stands for extended,
which means 128-bit register.
It's not MMX.
P for packed, I for signed integer.
If you have an unsigned integer,
it'll be EPU.
8 is the size of the element type.
Where Altivec uses vecadd over and
over again for different data types,
you'll see that SSC changes
the function name or the
intrinsic name as you go along.
PES stands for packed float,
packed single precision float.
And in addition,
the SSC unit supports 64-bit INS,
which is the EPI64.
You can do packed double precision.
And also for the floating point stuff,
it has a series of scalar operations that
operate only one element in the vector.
So here's the sample function.
This is what you might do in Altivec
to calculate the distance from
the origin to a point in 2D space.
It's a simple square root
of x squared plus y squared.
Here's the same thing in SSE.
And you'll notice as I flip back and
forth that very little has changed here.
You have to include an extra header.
There's an xmm and trin.h,
which on GCC will pull in everything.
On Intel you might want to pull in
one of the later headers like emm or
pmm for the Prescott new instructions.
And there's a standard
multiplier you're used to,
mmolps.
Altivec has a multiply add fuse.
There is no multiply add fuse on SSEs,
so what we do is we split it apart into
add and multiply on the second line.
And then finally, for the square root,
we just call into Accelerate framework,
which is present on both platforms,
and you can call it with either
Altivec vectors or SSE vectors.
If you're clever,
you can sometimes write one piece of
code that works on both platforms.
So in the Universal Binary
Programming Guide,
you'll find an example of a matrix
multiplication that's written
using a shared set of code and some
defines up at front that map it to
either instruction set architecture.
C provides a sort of leading edge
support for standard operators
with vectors like this example,
which would work on both.
But that would tie you to GCC,
so take caution before going that way.
As far as what parts of the vector
unit are guaranteed to be there,
the hardware and the ABI supports MMX,
SSC, SSC2 guaranteed.
To detect SSC3,
you go through the same sysketl by name
interface that you use for Altivec,
except you change the string that you
use to test for SSC3 in particular.
particular.
For Floating Point,
you'll find that as far as the ISA goes,
there's a very good matchup in general.
Both are strongly influenced by IEEE 754.
SSC is a lot like Altivec,
except that you also get
double precision operations,
you get scalar operations, you know,
the divide and square root in hardware,
and it's a fully IEEE 754
compliant machine,
which means you can actually
get exceptions and set flags
and set rounding modes.
You don't get the multi-add fuse unit,
and you aren't going to
get vector compare bounds.
I doubt any of you have used
the vector compare bounds.
And there's a log 2 to
the x estimate on Altivec,
which isn't there either,
but you probably didn't use that either.
As for the Transcendentals,
as mentioned earlier,
just include Accelerate, accelerate.h.
It's sort of like your
vector math library.
It will give you all of the
vectors functions that you've
come to expect from libm.
And you get the rounding modes.
If you want to change the rounding
modes or exceptions or flag bits,
they provide intrinsics mm_get_scr.
You can read it in and you can
use mm_set_scr at the bottom of
this slide for changing things.
There's one additional hazard under
SSC that you'll have to watch out for
if you're doing floating point work.
They take a trap under normal.
Altivec does too.
The big difference is that
by default on a gValue,
you can't do that.
So if you're running a Mac OS X,
the denormal handling is turned off.
You can turn it on if you want
and you'll get a kernel trap.
And that takes 1,100 cycles
if you hit a denormal.
On Intel, it's handled in hardware,
but the denorms are on by default
because we're doing most of
the scalar arithmetic in your
application using the vector unit.
And if you hit a denormal,
it's a 1,500 cycle stall.
So you may want to take special steps.
You can do things like, for example,
check with the integer comparers
to see if you're actually a
denormal and then handle it.
handle those differently so you don't
actually hit the denormal in the floating
point segment of the vector unit.
If you want to turn denormals off,
which might be advisable
for real-time code,
you can do that by using double underbar
mmgetScr to load in the status and
control register or in the appropriate
bits to turn off the denormal support
and then slam it back into the MxScr.
As for integer,
you'll find the instructions
are very similar to MMX,
if you've ever done that for SSE2,
except they're sort of stamped
out twice in the register.
You can do standard add and subtract.
They provide 8, 16, 32 and 64 bits.
For saturated ads,
the support is more limited.
You only get 8 and 16-bit saturated ads.
You can do min and max operations
with signed and unsigned,
but only 8 and 16-bit integers.
There's 5 multiplication operators.
Almost none of them look
very much like Altevec,
so if you're doing multiplication,
you typically have to
rewrite those segments,
take advantage of these things.
They do the low and high work 16-bit
part of a 16 times 16-bit multiply.
There's another one that will do two
16-bit multiplies to get a 32-bit
products and add them together
and give you a 32-bit result.
That's a little bit like that.
I can't sum.
And there's some support for 32
by 32 gives you a 64-bit result.
There are various compare operations.
They operate just like AlteVec.
You can -- when you use them,
they return minus one,
where the compare returns true,
and zero in the mask where it's false.
But they don't set the condition
register or any equivalent
thereof on the x86 architecture,
so what you -- you'll have to do that
a different way if you want to branch
directly based on what those things do.
They provide a whole series of compares,
actually a larger set than
you'll get in AlteVec,
and they're available in floating point
in both scalar and pack varieties.
So the AlteVec set are here in blue,
but you also get not equal to and
unordered and ordered compares,
which are occasionally useful
for doing the right thing when
NANDs come through your code.
For integer compares,
there are only signed compares.
There are no unsigned integer compares,
so that involves some
dancing to get around,
and there's no 64-bit integer compare.
For predication,
if you actually want to branch based on
the result of one of these compare tests,
they have a move mask,
a series of move mask
instructions that you can use.
I forgot to mention earlier that
SSE is kind of designed with some
segmentation between the data types.
The integer, single precision and double
precision are different,
so oftentimes you'll find instructions
that do substantially the same thing.
For example, the loads,
which actually have
three different variants.
It's encouraged that you use the
right load with the right data type.
And here we have three
different move masks.
So we have one for integers,
one for double and one for float.
So anyway, in this example,
if you want to do a
SSC version of vec any equals,
which will branch if any value
between A and B is equal to its
counterpart in the other one,
what you can do is do
the regular compare,
which provides you with the
zero or negative one mask.
Move the mask bits,
it copies the high bit from
each packed single into the
integer register directly.
And then you can test that against zero.
More commonly in vector you'll use
something like a select instruction
to trace through both sides of a
conditional and then select between the
two results based on the value of a test.
There's no select instruction.
So what you have to do is the and not
and and then or the results together,
which you might have been
doing in scalar code.
It's the same sort of thing.
For type conversions,
you can do float to int conversions,
but it only does signed ints,
no unsigned support.
In addition, it saturates differently.
If you have a very large floating
point value that's outside the
range of a standard signed int,
it'll saturate to a very negative number.
So if you want to preserve
the Altivec behavior,
there's a three instruction
sequence you can do that.
You first test against 2 to the
31 to see if it's an overflow
and you get a mask back.
Then you do the conversion and then
finally you XOR the result with the
mask to flip all of those overflows,
which are giving a very negative number,
back up to a positive saturated value.
There are various int conversions.
Mostly these things boil down to
kinds of permute or pack operations.
In Altivec,
it's the same sort of thing on SSC.
There are a couple of
conversions which are not there,
such as the int to unsigned
short saturated pack.
I don't particularly use
that one myself very much,
so I don't miss it, but you might.
There is no unsaturated packing.
That's just a permute operation,
but if you need it and the permute
doesn't quite do what you want,
then one thing you can do is sort of
shift left and then shift back right
algebraically to chop off the high
bits and then do the saturated pack.
That will keep the saturating
pack from saturating.
From the small int to large int,
usually you just use the unpack.
They're a lot like the
Altivec merge instructions.
So you merge it with zero
to go from a small unsigned
to a larger unsigned value.
For the Permute unit-- oh, I'm sorry.
This is-- I'm sorry.
It says unpack,
but this is really how to do a transpose.
The merges are there,
so you can just-- previously in
Altivec you'd use merge to do-- eight
merges to do a transpose operation.
You can do the same
thing with unpack things.
The only difference is that because the--
the data appears in the register,
you swap low for high,
which can be a little confusing.
As for the permute shifts-- the shifts,
there are shift supports for
a variety of different types,
but there isn't shift
support for 8-bit integers.
So if you're working on 8-bit
ints and you need to shift them,
you'll probably have to
promote them to 16-bit ints,
shift them, and put them back.
They do have shifts for 64-bit types,
which is handy.
There's a 128-bit shift like Altevec,
but it'll only move in
multiples of 8 bits.
It's a little bit like vec slo or sro.
And it's a shift by immediate only,
so if you want to shift like
we might have done in the
permute unit for misalignment,
there's no way to do that.
Finally, there's a series of shuffle
commands which do some basic
sort of arbitrary permutes.
I wouldn't say that it doesn't
cover all of the kinds of permutes
you'd want to do with Altivec or
that you could do with Altivec.
Altivec will allow you to
move any bytes anywhere.
The permute unit is a little
bit more limited here.
So for floating point,
there is a floating point shuffle
that will allow you to copy two floats
from vector A and put them in the
high two positions on the result.
And then two floats from vector
B and put them into the low
two positions on the result.
There's an integer permute which
operates on 32-bit ints which
will allow you to just randomly
shuffle around within one vector.
And then there's a 16-bit thing
which does the same thing except you
randomly shuffle them around within
the high or low 64 bits of the vector.
And there's no way to do 8-bit stuff.
The only thing there is is
16-bit shifts left and right.
Or you can do 8-bit merges.
So as I mentioned earlier,
there's a lot of things that
can't be done with the permute.
It's sometimes difficult to move data
between the low and high 64-bit segments.
The minimum permute level is the word,
which is 16-bits on the x86 platform,
not a byte.
So if you want to do
something like a byte swap,
you're going to have to shift left,
shift right, or the results together.
There is the byteways on the pack.
But there's no good way to do
data-dependent data movements.
So if you are writing a matrix
inverse and you need to find a pivot
element and you want to rotate data
around based on the pivot element,
you don't know where
it is at compile time,
you might have to start
out and use a scalar unit.
As to loads and stores,
the scalar loads and stores
always load into one end of
the vector in a fixed position,
which may be welcome.
It's a little bit of a game to figure
out where your data went on AltaVec if
you're doing scalar loads and stores.
And there's a whole series of
instructions that can do that.
There's move_ss,
move_sd for single and double precision,
and move_d for integers.
Move_d will also move
directly to the integer unit,
so that's kind of handy in some cases.
So that doesn't really
translate directly very well.
And then--
The vector loads and stores on SSC,
they have the align flavor like Altivec.
It's very fast.
However, if your pointer is misaligned,
Altivec would just return
you the aligned vector.
SSC will return an access exception,
so it's suggested you don't do that.
As for misaligned loads and stores,
those are handled in hardware.
There's a separate instruction for those,
which is convenient.
It's one and a half to two
times slower in many cases.
But misaligned stores
are particularly costly,
so I suggest you don't do that.
You might want to iterate in scalar code
up to the first the line boundary and
then go forward with vector after that.
So in summary,
the misaligned access is handled
almost completely differently.
It's almost orthogonal to Altivec.
You can write some Altivec which does
the same thing as SSC but is not a
particularly fast implementation.
It's suggested you always align
your stores and be careful
of those crashing problems.
And there's one more thing when you
load and store data from memory.
It's little endian,
so it gets bytes swapped.
The full 16 bytes,
the entire vector is bytes swapped.
And the end result of that is that
the elements which should appear on
the left side of the vector are now
on the right side of the vector.
So you're going to have to keep that
in mind while you're programming
because those shift lefts or shift
rights are actually going the
other way from what you think.
And so there it is in the graphic.
Unrolling for performance in
PowerPC you'd frequently do
several things in parallel to
try to keep the pipelines busy.
PowerPC is especially deep
pipelines compared to x86.
So this was often
required for performance.
It's a bad idea on SSC in many cases.
There aren't enough registers to hold
that kind of parallelism and everything
is reordered quite successfully and
quite efficiently in the back end.
So you're actually better off
with some serially unrolled code
that just reuses the same small
set of registers over and over.
That'll save you some
spills out onto the stack.
And it all gets reordered for parallelism
back in the back of the machine.
So the machine stays full.
You just don't have to write this
massive body of parallel code.
You just write the little loop.
So other performance tips.
Overall,
I would suggest you try to reduce
or eliminate your need for the unit.
There are many cases where
people go to town with that thing
and work to create an Altivec.
It's not going to port very well.
You may have to change data layouts.
It's very -- it suggested
you align your data.
That was always a good idea for Altivec,
but it's a good idea here, too.
Do not enroll as much for parallelism,
as I mentioned earlier.
And one other thing -- I mean,
it's often a fun game in Altivec to
synthesize your constants and code
rather than looking them up from memory.
It doesn't really get you much here.
There's no VEX splat to begin with,
so it's hard to make them.
And then the problem is that
there's eight registers,
so they'll just spill
out to the stack anyway,
so you'll have to load them in again.
So if this is starting to
sound like a bit of work,
I will encourage you once again
to use the Accelerate framework.
In summary,
I'll say that the platform that you'll
be porting to has fewer registers.
It has a 64-bit ALU in the back end,
so things are moving through in
successive pipeline stages rather than
one instruction per pipeline stage.
And the pipelines are a lot shorter,
so you have to enroll a lot less,
or sometimes not at all,
or preferentially serially in parallel.
Nearly all the vector instructions
dispatch through a single port,
except loads and moves and stores.
So there's not as much advantage
to hand-scheduling stuff,
so you get permuted against ALU activity,
that kind of thing.
The Seq program model is there.
The data types,
you can use Accelerate types
for both Altivec and SSC.
They work interchangeably.
And for intrinsics,
you can include xmm.h to get them.
And so we found in our case that
some codes are not as good as others.
In the case that some code
can port over fairly cleanly,
especially floating point code,
if you're heavily dependent on permute
or have difficult misalignment problems,
then those could be more of a challenge.
Remember that the element
order is backwards in register
from what you're used to.
And I'll suggest again that you
use the Accelerate framework
to avoid porting worries.
So for more information,
you can go to the standard WWDC website.
And you can also go to
various reference pages.
Velocity Engine web page currently
doesn't say too much about Intel,
but it will.
Intel reference documents are available.
You can downline the,
what are essentially the equivalents
of the PIM and PEM from Intel.
Here's the link to it.
And the universal binary program
guidelines will get you started.
And it's a rather long URL,
so we've given you a
tiny one to go with it.
And here's some contact slides if
you need to get in touch with us.